Project Gutenberg's USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 1935: Hemp, by B. B. Robinson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 1935: Hemp

Author: B. B. Robinson

Release Date: May 28, 2019 [EBook #59625]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK USDA FARMERS' BULLETIN NO. 1935 ***




Produced by Tom Cosmas compiled from images made available
by The Internet Archive.










Transcriber Note

Text emphasis is denoted as _Italics_ and =Bold=. Whole and fractional
parts of numbers a s 12-3/4.


  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                             Hemp                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                  FARMERS' BULLETIN No. 1935                  |
  |                                                              |
  |               U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE                |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+




                                CONTENTS


                                                      Page
              _Caution_                                  2
              _HEMP_                                     3
              _What it is_                               3
              _It grows well in corn belts_              4
              _How to grow it_                           5
                  _Soils and Fertilizers_                5
                  _Seed_                                 6
                  _When to plant_                        6
                  _Seeding_                              6
                  _Culture_                              7
              _Varieties to grow_                        7
              _Enemies_                                  8
              _Harvesting_                               8
                  _Time to Harvest_                      8
                  _Machinery_                            9
                  _Retting_                             10
                  _Underretting and Overretting_        11
                  _Sunburning_                          11
                  _Turning Soils_                       11
                  _Testing the End Point of the Ret_    12
              _Picking Up the Retted Stalks_            14
              _Extra Care Insures Extra Profits_        15
              _Yeilds_                                  16


_Caution_



The HEMP PLANT contains the drug marihuana. Any farmer planning to grow
hemp must comply with certain regulations of the Marihuana Tax Act of
1937. This involves registration with the farmer's nearest Internal
Revenue Collector and the payment of a fee of $1. Although the fee is
small, the registration is mandatory and should not be neglected, as
the penalty provisions for not complying with the regulations are very
severe. The registration must be renewed each year beginning July 1.
This so-called "license" permits a farmer to obtain viable hempseed from
a registered firm dealing in hemp, to plant and grow the crop, and to
deliver mature, retted hemp stalks to a hemp mill.

  Washington, D. C.                                Issued January 1943
                                           Slightly Revised April 1952




                                 _HEMP_


                 By B. B. Robinson, _Senior Agrononmist_

 _Division of Cotton and Other Fiber Crops and Diseases Bureau of Plant
   Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering Agricultural Research
                             Administration_


HEMP is a fiber used in making twines and light cordage. It is also used
as an extender for imported cordage fibers, particularly abaca, sisal,
and henequen, when supplies of these are not adequate to meet domestic
demands. The size of the hemp industry, therefore, is greatly influenced
by the availability of imported cordage fibers.

Hemp is not a hard crop to grow. It should be planted on the most
productive land on the farm--land that would make 50 to 70 bushels of
corn per acre.

The crop is planted with a grain drill and harvested with special
machinery rented from hemp mills.

It is allowed to lie on the ground until the outer part of the stalks has
rotted, freeing the fibers. This process is called dew retting.

The most important step in hemp farming is to stop the retting process at
the proper time. (See pp. 12 and 13.)

This bulletin tells how to grow and harvest hemp. For more information
write to the Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural
Engineering, United States Department of Agriculture, or to your State
experiment station, or consult your county agent.




_What it is_


Hemp is an annual plant that grows from seed each year, and therefore it
can be brought readily into production. It produces twice as much fiber
per acre as flax, the only other fiber that is its equal in strength and
durability and that is known to be suitable for culture and preparation
on machinery in this country.

When hempseed is sown thickly for fiber production, the plants usually
grow from 5 to 8 feet tall. However, when the plants are thinly spaced in
rows for seed production, they may, under favorable conditions, reach a
height of 12 to 16 feet. If the plants are not crowded, they become much
branched and are bushy. Uniform stems approximately 3/8 inch in diameter
and 5 to 8 feet long are especially desired for fiber production, because
they can be handled well by the harvesting and processing machinery
available in this country.

[Illustration]

Hemp is a dioecious plant, that is, the staminate (male) and pistillate
(female) flowers are borne on separate plants, rather than both on one
plant. The flowers of the two types of plants are different, but the male
plant is easily distinguished from the female, as the anthers are about
the size of a wheat kernel. The male plants die soon after discharging
their pollen; this is usually about 3 to 5 weeks before the female plants
mature seed and die.

The fiber of commerce ranges from 4 to 8 feet in length and has the
appearance of a flat, fine ribbon. It lies very close to the epidermis or
skin of the plant. Spinners desire the fiber ribbon 1/16 inch or less in
width. The long strands of fiber are called "line" fiber to distinguish
them from "tow" fiber, which consists of shorter, broken, tangled pieces.




_It grows well in the Corn Belt_


Hemp is recommended as a good crop for the Corn Belt States, because of
their favorable climatic and soil conditions.

Most fiber-producing varieties of hemp require a frost-free growing
season of 5 months or longer to produce seed and approximately 4 months
for fiber production. Hemp will endure light frosts in the spring and
survive frosts in the fall better than corn. It grows best when well
supplied with moisture throughout its growling season and especially in
its early stages of growth. Drought conditions, if accompanied by high
temperatures, appear to hasten maturity before the plants are fully grown.

The vegetative growth of hemp should be uniform. This growth is
noticeably affected if the soil is flooded or saturated with moisture for
too long a period. The leaves turn yellow, and the plants die. Rainfall,
well distributed during the growing season, is, therefore, desirable for
uniform vegetative growth. Hemp should be planted only on well-drained
soils and not on flat, heavy, impervious soils.

Climate is important not only in the growth of the plant but also in the
preparation of the crop after harvest. It influences the method used in
handling the crop and the labor requirements, which determine the cost
of production. In the United States the common practice (known as dew
retting) is to cut the crop and let it lie on the ground. Exposure to the
weather causes the fiber in the outer part of the stem to separate. Light
snows and alternate freezing and thawing seem to improve or make the
retting more uniform.




_How to grow it_


=Soils and Fertilizers=

Hemp should not be grown on poor soils. To obtain good yields and fiber
of high-quality, it is necessary to have a growth of uniform stalks 6 to
8 feet long. Short stalks, from poor nonfertile soils, seldom produce a
high-quality fiber.

Fiber hemp grows successfully on soils of the Clarion, Tama, Carrington,
Maury, Hagerstown, and Miami series, which, in general, are deep,
medium-heavy loams, well-drained, and high in organic matter.
Artificially drained areas of the Webster, Brookston, and Maumee series
also give satisfactory yields. These soils are among the most productive
soils of the Corn Belt. They produce average yields of 50 to 70 bushels
or more of corn per acre. If land will not produce from 50 to 70 bushels
of corn per acre, it should not be planted to hemp for fiber production.

Muck or peat soils are not recommended for the production of high-quality
hemp fiber. The quantity of fiber produced per acre on these soils may be
very high, but experience has demonstrated that the fiber lacks strength,
which is the first requirement of hemp fiber for good cordage.

The inexperienced farmer usually gets advice from an experienced
hemp-mill superintendent in the selection of the right soil. In fact, the
farmer's contract to grow hemp usually specifies the exact field that it
has been mutually agreed should be used for the hemp crop. This type of
supervision by the company contracting for hemp has helped to prevent
many crop failures.

Hemp should not be grown continuously on the same soil, for the same
reasons that many other crops are not adapted to such practices. In
Wisconsin, fields previously used for a cultivated crop are selected
for hemp planting in preference to ones upon which small grains have
been grown. In Kentucky, bluegrass sod, if obtainable, is selected. Old
pastures plowed up are well suited for hemp culture. Fields previously
cropped to soybeans, alfalfa, and clover are excellent for hemp. A good
rotation is to follow corn with hemp, and in Kentucky a fall cereal may
follow the hemp.

Although hemp requires a rich soil, it does not remove from the farm an
excess of plant-food material. Nearly all the leaves on the hemp plants,
containing much of the plant nutrients removed from the soil, fall
off during the growth and maturing of the plant. The remaining leaves
may drop off in the field during the process of retting. Further, the
plant stems lose about 20 percent in weight of soluble and decomposed
materials, which leach out upon the fields, and the stubble may be plowed
under. The plant in this manner returns to the land a large part of the
plant nutrients that it removes during its growth.

Commercial fertilizers may be used to advantage on soils that are not
well supplied with organic matter. Ordinarily, the best fertilizer
for hemp is barnyard manure, but commercial fertilizer can be used to
advantage to supplement manure. Lime applications may be supplied on acid
soils to advantage. Consult your county agent for recommendations as to
amounts of fertilizer and lime to apply.

=Seed=

The period of flowering of the hemp plant may extend over several weeks,
and as a result the seed does not all mature at one time. Hemp seed
for sowing frequently contains some immature green to yellowish-green
seeds that may not germinate well. Good hempseed for sowing should be
relatively free of such seeds and should germinate 90 percent or better.
As the oil content of hempseed usually ranges between 29 and 34 percent,
the seed should be kept cool and dry, as it spoils rapidly under warm
and damp conditions. Hemp seed seldom retains its germinating power well
enough to be used for seed after 2-years' storage.

=When to Plant=

Hemp should be planted in the spring just before corn. In a program
calling for small spring grains and corn, the farmer should plan to plant
his hemp between the time he plants his small grains and the corn.

=Seeding=

Hemp grown for seed production should be sown in rows or hills. The hills
are commonly spaced 5 by 5 feet, with 6 to 10 seeds to the hill, planted
not more than 1/2 inch deep. The plants are thinned to 3 to 5 to a hill.
If care is taken to save seed, about 1-1/2 pounds wall sow an acre. Most
farmers use more seed, and frequently the crop is replanted because of
late floods or failure to obtain good stands.

Hemp grown for fiber should be sown with a broadcast seeder or with a
grain drill. A drill with 4 inches between drill tubes is preferred to
one with 6 inches or more. The seed should not be planted deeper than 1
inch, and a depth of 1/2 inch is preferred. If the seed is planted deep,
the hemp seedling is not capable of pushing its way to the surface of the
ground. A slight crust on the ground frequently results in a poor stand.
If the seedbed is loose, disks on a seed drill may cut too deep into the
soil and the seed will be sown more than 1 inch deep. In such cases, to
make certain that the disks do not cut too deep into the seedbed, they
should be tied to the seed box.

A standard bushel of hempseed weighs 44 pounds. The rate of seeding hemp
for fiber production ranges between 3 and 5 pecks of seed per acre. In
Kentucky, where hemp is hand-broken, it has been the practice to sow 3
pecks (33 pounds) per acre. However, when the hemp is to go to the mill,
1 bushel per acre gives a product that is better suited to milling.
Wisconsin and other Corn Belt farmers have commonly sown 5 pecks per
acre. The lighter rate of seeding in Kentucky produces larger stalks.
These stalks are easily broken, and the fiber is easily prepared by the
hand-breaking methods that have been used there since colonial days.
Machine methods of breaking and scutching to prepare the fiber are used
in Wisconsin, and recently to some extent in Kentucky. The machines will
handle finer stems, and the sowing of 5 pecks is advisable where hemp is
to be prepared by machine.

[Illustration]

A good practice in planting hemp for fiber production is to sow around
the edge of the field next to the fence a 16- to 18-foot width of small
grains, which may be harvested before the hemp. Space is thus provided
for the harvester to enter the field and begin cutting without injuring
the hemp. It also prevents hemp plants at the edge from growing too rank.
Uniform plants are necessary for uniform fiber quality.

=Culture=

Fall plowing in Wisconsin gives better results with hemp than spring
plowing.

Hemp for fiber production requires little or no cultivation or care
after planting until the harvest; but if, after seeding and before the
seedlings emerge, the ground crusts badly it may be advisable to roll the
field to break the crust. Hemp for seed production should be cultivated
the same as corn; that is, sufficiently to keep back the weeds. Spudding
out Canada thistles where they appear in dense stands in hemp fields
should be done when the hemp is only a few inches high. In most cases
hemp will compete well with weeds, if the hemp gets off to a good start.




_Varieties to grow_


The fiber hemp grown in the United States by the early colonists was of
European origin; but our present hemp, commonly known as Kentucky or
domestic hemp, is of Chinese origin. Few importations of hempseed have
been made in recent years for commercial plantings, as imported seed has
not proved as productive under domestic conditions as Kentucky hemp.




_Enemies_


In the United States there are no hemp diseases of economic importance,
and hemp has not been seriously attacked by insects. The European corn
borer and similar stem-boring insects occasionally kill a hemp stem.
However, they have not proved important, perhaps because hemp has not
been grown to any extent in the sections of the United States where the
European corn borer is a serious pest. Seedling plants are frequently
attacked by cutworms and white grubs after spring plowing of sod land.

Broom rape is a small weed 6 to 15 inches high that is parasitic on the
roots of hemp, tobacco, and tomatoes, it usually grows in clumps and has
purple flowers, which produce many very small seeds. These adhere to the
waxy flower parts surrounding the hempseed and are distributed in this
manner. Broom rape can be very serious on hemp if proper control measures
are not followed. Only well-cleaned hempseed and seed from fields
containing no broom rape should be sown.

Hemp has been recommended as a weed-control crop. Its dense, tall
growth helps to kill out many common weeds. The noxious bindweed, a
member of the morning-glory family, is checked to some extent by hemp.
Unfortunately, bindweed and several other species of morning-glory
have seeds so near the same size and weight of hempseed that mixtures
obtained in producing hempseed are carried to the field planted for fiber
production. In growing hemp for seed all vine weeds of this type found on
the hemp stalks should be removed before the hemp plants begin to produce
seed.

[Illustration]




_Harvesting_


=Time to Harvest=

Hemp is harvested for seed production when the plant on being shaken
sheds most of its seed. This occurs when the seeds are fully mature on
the middle branches. The seeds will mature on the lower branches first
and on the top of the plant last. The common method of harvesting hemp
for seed production is to cut it by hand and shock it to permit more seed
to mature and cure before threshing. The harvesting should be in the
early morning or on damp days when the seeds do not shatter so much as
they do in the warmer and drier part of the day. Threshing of the seed
hemp should be done on dry afternoons. In threshing, the seed shocks
should be placed on large canvas cloths 24 by 24 feet and then be beaten
with long sticks to remove the seed.

Hemp is harvested for fiber production when the male plants are in full
flower and are shedding pollen. By harvesting before the male plants die,
the retting of both male and female plants is more uniform, as both types
of plants are still green and growing. The harvesting period may extend
for 2 weeks or longer. Very early harvested hemp may produce a finer and
softer fiber than that harvested later, but it is usually weaker. The
fiber from hemp that has been harvested so late that many seeds have
matured does not possess so good cordage and textile characteristics
as fiber from hemp harvested earlier. Hemp stalks should be relatively
free of leaves except a few at the very top before harvesting. This is
important when hemp is shocked after harvest, as it makes the top of the
shock smaller so that less rain can enter the shock.

[Illustration]

=Machinery=

Harvesting methods vary with locality and climate. In Kentucky, hemp may
grow to a height of 15 feet or more. These long stalks are difficult to
handle with machinery. Self-rake reapers (see below) have been used in
harvesting hemp for many years, and they probably do better work with
very tall hemp than any other machine now available. A modified rice
binder, which cuts and binds the hemp into bundles, is also available,
although difficulty in handling the very tall hemp may be experienced.
This latter type of machine can be used for short hemp in areas, such as
Kentucky, where hemp must be shocked within a few days after harvest to
avoid sunburn.

[Illustration]

In the northern part of the Corn Belt the hemp usually does not grow so
tall and therefore can be handled more easily with machines. During the
first World War hemp-harvesting machinery was developed. These harvesters
(see above) in one operation cut an 8- or 9-foot swath and elevate the
stalks to a quarter-circle platform where they are turned automatically
and dropped or spread on the ground for retting. The butts of the stems
all lie in the same direction and are relatively even. The thickness of
the layer of stalks in the swath influences the speed and uniformity of
the dew retting. Machines of this type, because of their labor economy,
are recommended for use in the Northern States, where hemp can be safely
spread for retting when harvested.

Hemp harvesters are usually owned by the hemp mills. They are rented to
the individual farmers, who usually furnish the motive power and the
labor to run the harvesters.




_Retting_


Retting is the partial rotting of the hemp stalk. It permits the fiber
in the stalk to separate easily in long strands from the woody core. The
fiber strands break if unretted stems are bent or broken.

In this country the usual practice is to ret hemp by allowing it to lie
on the ground, where it is exposed to rain and dew. This method is called
dew retting.

Dew retting is dependent upon dews and rains to furnish the moist
conditions necessary for the growth of the molds that cause the retting.
In warm, moist weather the retting may require 1 to 2 weeks, but usually
4 to 5 weeks is required for retting in Kentucky and Wisconsin. Hemp has
remained spread under snow in Wisconsin until spring without serious
injury, but more often hemp left under snow all winter is overretted and
ruined.

=Underretting and Overretting=

If hemp stalks are lifted from the ground before they are sufficiently
retted, the fiber will not separate easily from the woody hurds (small
pieces of the woody core of the plant) in milling. However, if the
retting is permitted to go too far, the fiber separates very readily
from the core, but the adhesive substance between the individual fiber
cells in the long strand breaks down and the fiber is weak. Hemp further
overretted produces mostly short broken strands of fiber called tow
fiber, which is less valuable than the long parallel strands of fiber
called line fiber.

Nowhere in the growing or processing of hemp is good judgment more needed
than in determining the time to end the ret. Experience and good judgment
are necessary to determine just when the hemp stalks should be lifted
from the field and bundled. The lifting and shocking stops the retting
action. The value of the fiber can be cut in half or entirely lost by
several days' overretting in warm weather.

=Sunburning=

In Kentucky, hemp spread immediately to ret after harvest is apt to
sunburn, or sunscald. It is common belief that the hot, bright days in
August and September in some way cause deterioration of the fiber if
spread for retting. Sunburned fiber is uneven in color, usually has
less strength, and possibly is drier and more harsh than fiber not
sunburned. In order to avoid sunscalding, the hemp is shocked after being
harvested and not spread for retting until the cooler days of November.
In locations having climatic conditions similar to those prevailing in
Wisconsin, sunscald of hemp is rare.

[Illustration]

=Turning Stalks=

In dew retting the spread stalks should be turned once or more during the
retting period. This aids in bleaching the stalks and results in fiber
of more uniform color and quality. The turning is done by workmen using
bent poles approximately 8 to 10 feet in length. The poles are pushed
under the head ends of stalks in the swath, and the stalks are turned
over without moving the butt ends.

[Illustration]

In turning the straw the workmen start in the middle of the field,
turning the first swath into vacant center space. The second swath will
be turned to lie where the first swath had been, and so on.

Care should be exercised in turning to prevent the stalks from tangling.
The more hemp is handled, the more tangled the stalks may become. Tangled
hemp is more difficult to process and produces a high proportion of
tangled, short, tow fiber.

=Testing the End Point of the Ret=

A few days too long in the field may make the difference between retting
and rotting. Therefore, it is most important that inexperienced farmers
obtain the assistance of the hemp-mill superintendent or an experienced
grower in determining when to stop the retting.

Dry hemp stalks should be tested when possible to determine the degree of
retting. Three to six stalks are taken in both hands and bent back and
forth to perform the break test. If properly retted, the fiber should not
break when the woody core breaks. The hurds should fall free of the fiber
in the breaking and shaking between one's hands. If the hemp is only
partly retted, some hurds will adhere to the loosened fiber. Unretted
hemp fiber is usually green or light yellow. Dew-retted hemp is usually
slate gray or black.

After the fiber is broken free, its strength should be tested by
breaking a small strand between the fingers. A small strand of fiber
not twisted and about 3/32 inch wide should break with great difficulty
and with a decided snap. If it is very weak and breaks with little or no
snap the hemp is probably badly overretted or may have been grown under
unfavorable cultural conditions. (See p. 5.)

[Illustration]

All indication that the retting end point is near is that the hemp makes
"bowstrings." In a small percentage of the stems, less than 1 to 5
percent under certain conditions, the middle of the stalks appears to ret
first. The fiber comes free from the middle and forms a string fastened
at the top and bottom of the stem, not unlike a bowstring. If bowstring
stems are found, a sample of the hemp should be taken to the hemp-mill
superintendent as soon as possible for verification of the retting end
point. The bowstring condition is only a supplementary aid in determining
when to stop the retting, and it may or may not occur in properly
dew-retted hemp.

Some experienced hemp producers use the peeling test for determining the
degree of retting. This is accomplished by peeling the fiber away from
the butt ends of the stems. If properly retted, the fiber should peel
freely from the woody core of the stem. If the hemp is not sufficiently
retted, the fiber will break after a few inches have been peeled. This
free-peeling stage is desirable for breaking hemp on hand breaks. Where
hemp is to be processed by machinery the retting need not progress quite
so far as is necessary for hand breaking.

[Illustration]




_Picking Up the Retted Stalks_


Hemp stalks may be picked up by hand. This method has been used from
early times and is satisfactory where labor is plentiful. However, in
this country it is being replaced by machine pick-up binders.

In picking up the straw by hand, small sticks about 3 feet long with a
single steel or wooden hook on the end are used. The hemp is raked into
bunches with these implements, and usually tied. Hemp-fiber bands are
used in tying the bundles. An inexpensive "buck" (see above) may be used
to bunch the hemp, or it may be bunched with a pitchfork.

[Illustration]

The most efficient method is to use the pick-up binder. These machines,
drawn by tractors, cover about an acre an hour. They pick up the retted
hemp stalks and tie them into bundles in one operation. The machines are
part of the modern hemp-mill equipment and are rented to farmers.

Dew-retted hemp is usually shocked after being picked up. The hemp
remains in the shock until it is transported to the mill.

[Illustration]




_Extra Care Insures Extra Profits_


The farmer's job is done when he delivers the hemp to the mill. All
further processing to prepare the fiber is part of the milling operation.
However, it is of interest to both farmers and mill operators to attempt
to keep the hemp stalks and fiber well butted. This means keeping the
butt ends of the stalks or fiber in a bundle all even. Every time the
hemp stalks are handled, care should be taken to see that this is done.
If the hemp stalks are well butted in the bundle when processed, the
milling operations can be carried out more economically. Tangled, uneven
bundles are more difficult and require more time to handle. The yield of
high-value long-life fiber is much greater if the stalks are well butted.

Hemp stalks are considered most desirable if they are less than half
an inch in diameter. The thickness of a pencil is frequently used to
illustrate the size of desirable stalks. The larger diameter stalks have
a lower percentage of fiber than finer stems, are harder to break, and
produce more tow fiber.

Hemp stalks grown on unproductive soil usually contain a lower percentage
of fiber, and this fiber may be coarse, harsh, and of low strength, so
that it breaks into tow in milling.

Stalks underretted frequently must be run through the mill breaker a
second or third time to remove the remaining hurds. This increases the
milling labor costs, and the resultant fiber may be reduced to a low
grade. On the other hand, overretted hemp must be milled as little as
possible, with less pressure exerted on the rollers and a slower speed of
the scutcher wheel to keep from making an excess amount of tow fiber.




_Yields_


Hemp yields have been extremely variable when this crop has been planted
in new areas by inexperienced farmers. In Wisconsin and Kentucky, where
only experienced farmers have grown the crop in recent years, the yields
have not varied a great deal. The crop has been reasonably dependable and
has not often been injured by storms or droughts.

The average yields per acre for experienced farmers are approximately
2-1/4 to 2-1/2 tons of air-dry retted hemp stalks; 850 pounds total
fiber. Under the Wisconsin machine-milling system the yields may average
450 pounds line fiber and 400 pounds tow fiber; under the Kentucky
hand-breaking system they may average 775 pounds Kentucky rough and 75
pounds tow.

If hemp is planted for seed production, the average yields per acre are
approximately 15 bushels or 660 pounds, on bottom land, and 12 bushels on
uplands.




U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1952

              For sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
                    U. S. Government Printing Office
                  Washington 25, D. C. -- Price 10 cents


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber Note


Illustrations were moved so as to not split paragraphs. Minor errors were
corrected. The Contents was added for ease of locating sections of interest.
This file was produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 1935: Hemp, by 
B. B. Robinson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK USDA FARMERS' BULLETIN NO. 1935 ***

***** This file should be named 59625.txt or 59625.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/6/2/59625/

Produced by Tom Cosmas compiled from images made available
by The Internet Archive.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

